README.md, before:

# rodauth-i18n

Provides [I18n] integration for [Rodauth] authentication framework.

It also includes built-in translations for various languages, which you are encouraged to extend :pray:

## Installation

Add the gem to your project:

```sh
$ bundle add rodauth-i18n
```

## Usage

Enable the `i18n` feature in your Rodauth configuration, which overrides Rodauth's `#translate` method to use the [I18n] gem.

```rb
plugin :rodauth do
  enable :i18n
  # ...
end
```

Enabling the feature will automatically load built-in translations for locales specified in `I18n.available_locales`. If unset, translations for *all* locales will be loaded.

### Per configuration translations

If you want to translate differently for different Rodauth configurations, you can define translations under the namespace matching the configuration name:

```rb
plugin :rodauth, name: :admin do
  enable :i18n
  # ...
end
```
```yml
en:
  rodauth:
    admin:
      create_account_button: Create Admin Account
```

You can change the translation namespace via the `i18n_namespace` setting:

```rb
plugin :rodauth, name: :superadmin do
  enable :i18n
  i18n_namespace "admin"
end
```

Any translations that are not found under the configuration namespace will fall back to top-level. If you want to disable this behaviour, you can do so via the `i18n_cascade?` setting:

```rb
i18n_cascade? false
```

### Copying translations

In a Rails app, you can copy built-in translations into your app via the `rodauth:translations` generator. By default, it will import translations for available locales, but you can also give it a list of locales:

```sh
$ rails generate rodauth:translations en hr
# create  config/locales/rodauth.en.yml
# create  config/locales/rodauth.hr.yml

$ rails generate rodauth:translations
# imports translations for available locales
```

Only translations for currently enabled Rodauth features will be imported. Re-running the generator will import translations for any newly enabled features, remove translations for any disabled features, and keep any existing translations unchanged.

On other web frameworks, you can copy the translation files directly from the `locales/` directory.

### Raising on missing translations

You can tell I18n to raise an error when a translation is missing:

```rb
i18n_raise_on_missing_translations? { Rails.env.test? }
```

### Falling back to untranslated value

In some cases it can be useful to fall back to untranslated value when the translation is missing:

```rb
i18n_fallback_to_untranslated? { Rails.env.production? }
```

### Available locales

If you want to load translations for a set of locales different than `I18n.available_locales`, you can configure that:

```rb
i18n_available_locales [:en, :pt]
```

### Overriding current locale

The current locale defaults to `I18n.locale`, but you can override that:

```rb
i18n_locale :en
```

### Custom I18n options

You can pass any custom options to the `I18n.translate` method via `i18n_options`:

```rb
i18n_options { { exception_handler: -> (*args) { ... } } }
```

## Localized routes

If you want to prefix your routes with current locale, you can do so as
follows:

```rb
prefix do
  if I18n.locale == I18n.default_locale
    "/auth"
  else
    "/#{I18n.locale}/auth"
  end
end
```
```rb
route do |r|
  # ...
  all_locales = I18n.available_locales.map(&:to_s) - [I18n.default_locale.to_s]
  # routes requests starting with `(/:locale)/auth/*`
  r.on [*all_locales, true], "auth" do |locale|
    rails_request.path_parameters[:locale] = locale # for controller callbacks (if using Rails)
    r.rodauth # route Rodauth requests
  end
end
```

The static `/auth` path prefix is optional, it was just to show how it would be
incorporated.

## Shipping translations with your Rodauth plugin

To make texts in your Rodauth plugin translatable, use the `translatable_method` macro. Macros for defining flash messages, button texts, and page titles internally call `translatable_method`, and are thus automatically translatable.

```rb
# lib/rodauth/features/foo.rb
module Rodauth
  Feature.define(:foo, :Foo) do
    translatable_method :foo_message, "This message is translatable"
    error_flash "Flash messages are automatically translatable", "foo"
    button "Translatable button text", "foo"
    view "foo", "Translatable page title", "foo"
  end
end
```

You can then define translations in the `locales/` directory in your gem root:

```yml
# locales/en.yml
en:
  rodauth:
    foo_message: "..."
    foo_error_flash: "..."
    foo_button: "..."
    foo_page_title: "..."
```

Then, to have rodauth-i18n load your translations, register the directory when loading the feature:

```rb
# lib/rodauth/features/foo.rb
module Rodauth
  Feature.define(:foo, :Foo) do
    # ...
    def post_configure
      super
      i18n_register File.expand_path("#{__dir__}/../../../locales") if features.include?(:i18n)
    end
    # ...
  end
end
```

## Development

Run tests with Rake:

```sh
$ bundle exec rake test
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the rodauth-i18n project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

[I18n]: https://github.com/ruby-i18n/i18n
[Rodauth]: https://github.com/jeremyevans/rodauth
[Rails Internationalization Guide]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/i18n.html

Commit message:

Add instructions how to import new translations

README.md, after:

# rodauth-i18n

Provides [I18n] integration for [Rodauth] authentication framework.

It also includes built-in translations for various languages, which you are encouraged to extend :pray:

## Installation

Add the gem to your project:

```sh
$ bundle add rodauth-i18n
```

## Usage

Enable the `i18n` feature in your Rodauth configuration, which overrides Rodauth's `#translate` method to use the [I18n] gem.

```rb
plugin :rodauth do
  enable :i18n
  # ...
end
```

Enabling the feature will automatically load built-in translations for locales specified in `I18n.available_locales`. If unset, translations for *all* locales will be loaded.

### Per configuration translations

If you want to translate differently for different Rodauth configurations, you can define translations under the namespace matching the configuration name:

```rb
plugin :rodauth, name: :admin do
  enable :i18n
  # ...
end
```
```yml
en:
  rodauth:
    admin:
      create_account_button: Create Admin Account
```

You can change the translation namespace via the `i18n_namespace` setting:

```rb
plugin :rodauth, name: :superadmin do
  enable :i18n
  i18n_namespace "admin"
end
```

Any translations that are not found under the configuration namespace will fall back to top-level. If you want to disable this behaviour, you can do so via the `i18n_cascade?` setting:

```rb
i18n_cascade? false
```

### Copying translations

In a Rails app, you can copy built-in translations into your app via the `rodauth:translations` generator. By default, it will import translations for available locales, but you can also give it a list of locales:

```sh
$ rails generate rodauth:translations en hr
# create  config/locales/rodauth.en.yml
# create  config/locales/rodauth.hr.yml

$ rails generate rodauth:translations
# imports translations for available locales
```

Only translations for currently enabled Rodauth features will be imported. Re-running the generator will import translations for any newly enabled features, remove translations for any disabled features, and keep any existing translations unchanged.

On other web frameworks, you can copy the translation files directly from the `locales/` directory.

### Raising on missing translations

You can tell I18n to raise an error when a translation is missing:

```rb
i18n_raise_on_missing_translations? { Rails.env.test? }
```

### Falling back to untranslated value

In some cases it can be useful to fall back to untranslated value when the translation is missing:

```rb
i18n_fallback_to_untranslated? { Rails.env.production? }
```

### Available locales

If you want to load translations for a set of locales different than `I18n.available_locales`, you can configure that:

```rb
i18n_available_locales [:en, :pt]
```

### Overriding current locale

The current locale defaults to `I18n.locale`, but you can override that:

```rb
i18n_locale :en
```

### Custom I18n options

You can pass any custom options to the `I18n.translate` method via `i18n_options`:

```rb
i18n_options { { exception_handler: -> (*args) { ... } } }
```

## Localized routes

If you want to prefix your routes with current locale, you can do so as
follows:

```rb
prefix do
  if I18n.locale == I18n.default_locale
    "/auth"
  else
    "/#{I18n.locale}/auth"
  end
end
```
```rb
route do |r|
  # ...
  all_locales = I18n.available_locales.map(&:to_s) - [I18n.default_locale.to_s]
  # routes requests starting with `(/:locale)/auth/*`
  r.on [*all_locales, true], "auth" do |locale|
    rails_request.path_parameters[:locale] = locale # for controller callbacks (if using Rails)
    r.rodauth # route Rodauth requests
  end
end
```

The static `/auth` path prefix is optional, it was just to show how it would be
incorporated.

## Shipping translations with your Rodauth plugin

To make texts in your Rodauth plugin translatable, use the `translatable_method` macro. Macros for defining flash messages, button texts, and page titles internally call `translatable_method`, and are thus automatically translatable.

```rb
# lib/rodauth/features/foo.rb
module Rodauth
  Feature.define(:foo, :Foo) do
    translatable_method :foo_message, "This message is translatable"
    error_flash "Flash messages are automatically translatable", "foo"
    button "Translatable button text", "foo"
    view "foo", "Translatable page title", "foo"
  end
end
```

You can then define translations in the `locales/` directory in your gem root:

```yml
# locales/en.yml
en:
  rodauth:
    foo_message: "..."
    foo_error_flash: "..."
    foo_button: "..."
    foo_page_title: "..."
```

Then, to have rodauth-i18n load your translations, register the directory when loading the feature:

```rb
# lib/rodauth/features/foo.rb
module Rodauth
  Feature.define(:foo, :Foo) do
    # ...
    def post_configure
      super
      i18n_register File.expand_path("#{__dir__}/../../../locales") if features.include?(:i18n)
    end
    # ...
  end
end
```

## Development

Running tests:

```sh
$ bundle exec rake test
```

To automatically import new translations from Rodauth:

```sh
$ rake import
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the rodauth-i18n project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/janko/rodauth-i18n/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

[I18n]: https://github.com/ruby-i18n/i18n
[Rodauth]: https://github.com/jeremyevans/rodauth
[Rails Internationalization Guide]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/i18n.html
